---
title: Rent Relief
description: "Help relieve the burden of high rent while encouraging the construction of more affordable housing"
image: "/missing-middle.png"
rank: 2
---

## Summary

- Give the 10% lowest income earners who are not already in affordable housing money directly to spend on their rent
- Raise this money via a 2% land value tax that will disproportionately effect parking lots, vacant lots, and seasonal properties
- Repeal rent control
- Return inclusionary zoning to 10% with a $100,000 per-unit fee
- Drop the new construction special labor requirements

This would result in at least $100 per person per month to spend on rent. The 25th percentile for market rent for a 1 bedroom is was $850 in 2018. Assuming the bottom 10% of earners live at least in the bottom 25% of units this would cut rent down by over 10%. Since it is per person the more bedrooms a unit has the lower cost it will be. For a family of 4 in a three bedroom (bottom 25% rent $1,220) it is a 33% reduction!

The tax itself will encourage the development of more land into affordable housing because it will cost more not to develop your land, and more people can afford lower cost housing, increasing the demand, increasing the incentive to build it.

## Rent Relief vs. Rent Control

Rent relief can help protect renters from rising rents while avoiding many of the shortcomings of rent control. It is important to say upfront that we need a policy to protect tenants from rising housing costs because a lot of conversations about housing end with arguing that rent control is bad. Rent control is a disastrous policy but this should be the beginning of the conversation about what we can do to help people afford housing, not the end.

What's so bad about rent control? Rent keeps going up; that sucks. Why can't we just put a stop to it? To answer that let's take a step back and look at the problem we are trying to solve. The problem is that there isn't enough housing; more people want housing in the city than there is housing to be had. We have a bunch of land, with a bunch of housing on it, and a bunch of people who want housing. The big question is how do we decide who gets it?

Let's say we did nothing at all; how would decide who gets housing? We have all seen this before. Under this system people with money get the housing. The rent will get more expensive until the people without money have to move, new units that are built will also be rented at a high price and the city becomes an area where only the wealthy can live while middle class and poor people who work in the city are forced to make long commutes every day. Communities that lived in the city for generations will be displaced and scattered. When I lived in Mountain View, California they did nothing and every day I walked to my $3,800 per month one bedroom passed a block of parked RVs filled with families of people who needed to work in the area but could not afford housing. One morning I awoke to a nearly empty street and a row of freshly planted signs that read "No vehicles over 6 feet". I say nearly empty because the man who slept in his old honda civic was able to survive that purge. I never learned where they all ended up but I'd be willing to bet they are living in the same RVs and driving even further to work every day.

I don't like this answer, but how does rent control answer the decide who gets housing? With rent control, one group that gets it is people who are already living in their rental unit. At first this appears better. People can afford to stay in their rented apartments and that is a good thing. But it is not in people's nature to stay in the same place forever, our lives change. Let's say you were single and living with a roommate when rent control went into effect. You save money on your rent for a few years because of rent control but then you meet someone, fall in love and want to move in together; maybe start a family. You and your roommate decide you will look for another apartment and they will look for a new roommate. But now that you are moving you aren't somebody living in your rental unit anymore. How does rent control decide if you get housing then?

To get you and your special someone into a new apartment one of two things needs to happen: we either need to build a new one or somebody who has one has to leave. Let's look at a developer deciding to build new housing. When a developer builds a new unit they can either rent it out or sell it. House prices tend to rise over time and our city is no different. As house prices rise, rent control will keep rents the same. The more time passes the more our developer will profit from building units to sell instead of units to rent. Worse still, some existing landlords may be better off selling their building's units rather than continuing to rent them out. If you are looking to buy this will give you more options but more often than not the people who rely on rent control are not in the position to buy. But we can add people who can afford to buy to rent control's list of people who get housing.

How about getting somebody to leave? Let's look at a couple of recent empty nesters in a rent-controlled three bedroom. They would be happy to live with less space but if they moved they'd be in the same position as you looking for a new rent-controlled unit. With rent control the last thing you want to do is move. When I was living in New York City my rent for a 600 square foot one bedroom apartment was a little over $4,000. My great aunt lived alone in the three bedroom rent-controlled apartment that she raised her family in for around $600 a month. If she downsized by a bedroom she could 10x her rent.

With rent control fewer rental units are getting built and people are more hesitant to leave the ones that are already built. Meanwhile, lots of people want to move into rent-controlled units that are becoming cheaper and cheaper compared to buying, living in units exempt from rent control, or living outside the city. But all is not lost, at least some new rental units will be built (perhaps with some prodding from the government) and people will die eventually so we will get at least some available units. But how do we decide who gets them? Usually with rent control this is done with a wait list. My second cousin in New York was placed on a wait list like this when she was born and she was able to get a rent controlled unit when she was a young adult so people do get off the wait list eventually. We can add people who spend a long time on a wait list to rent control's list of people who get housing.

To make matters worse, short term rentals like AirBnB are not covered under rent control. This creates an even bigger incentive for property owners to use their property for short term rentals instead of renting it out to long term tenants. We can add vacationers to rent control's list of people who get housing.

Let's check in on your roommate. A lot of people want a bedroom in a rent controlled unit, in fact there is a wait list full of them. But the building doesn't assign roommates, people pick them themselves. Now your roommate is in charge of who gets to live in the unit. So we can add the friends and family of people who are already in rent-controlled units to our answer. But that's not all. A lot of people want the benefit of that rent-controlled unit, some of them may even be willing to tempt your roommate with a bit of extra money. If they pay just a little extra their rent will still be way lower than the cost of non rent-controlled housing and your roommate will get a nice bonus. This isn't allowed of course but how will landlords know the exact arrangement between each tenant? People get away with illegal sublets all the time and enforcement requires careful surveillance. And just like that we can add back people with money to rent-control's list, as long as they are not afraid to bend the rules a little bit.

To sum up rent control's list of people who get housing it is: people who are already living in a rent-controlled unit, people who can afford to buy, vacationers, people who decide long in advance that they want to rent in the city, the friends and family of people in rent-controlled units, and people with money who are OK with renting on the grey market. Now who doesn't get housing? People who are moving into the city, people who want to move to a place with more or less space, people who move away and want to move back home, and the children of people in the city. I don't like this answer either.

So What is rent relief and how does it decide who gets housing? Rent relief is a broad term for a lot of different of policies that all involve giving people money directly to pay their rent. Rent relief isn't a silver bullet but in my view it can help people in need without as many of the problems rent control causes. My proposal for rent relief is to create a land value tax which will go directly towards subsidies for people living in low-cost housing. This is not a property tax, it is a land value tax. This means developing a property won't increase your tax, it is entirely based on the value of the land itself. Also, the definition of low-cost considers number of residents so a family living in a two bedroom may be lower cost housing than a single person living in a one bedroom even if their monthly rent is higher. The policy is called rent relief but it could actually also apply to owners paying a mortgage as well.

Let's watch what happens to the same person from before when rent relief is passed. At first the policies would feel a bit similar. Your rent will go up but you will get a check to pay for it. At first it may sound like this is a government hand out to landlords but it is actually the opposite. The money in that check comes from a tax that the landlord themselves have paid. The higher rents are the more valuable their land is, the higher the tax revenue will be, and the higher the subsidy can be. You can think of this tax as setting aside money from landowners and allowing them to reclaim it by providing affordable housing. Now let's look at what happens when they try to move into a new place with someone else.

First let's look back at the developer. Landlords are being taxed a little bit more, making renting less profitable, just like before, so our developer wants to focus on selling units again. But there's a problem, owners are also taxed a little bit more, this prevents housing prices from rising as quickly; keeping them in proportion with rental revenues preserving the balance between the two housing types. All of that tax money is going towards helping people pay for more affordable housing, which means there is more money to be had developing low-cost housing rather than luxury units. This way we can encourage the construction of the types of units everyone can live in with the exact same mechanism we are using to keep people in their homes. This is really the biggest benefit of the rent relief plan. The only way we can have everyone win in the long term is by building more housing, and this plan helps facilitate that.

How about our AirBnB host? Vacationers don't get the housing subsidy so now if you do put your property up on AirBnB you pay a tax that goes directly towards housing subsidies for residents

Now let's go back to our empty nesters. Because housing affordability takes number of people living in the apartment into account, they will lose at least some of their subsidy if they were receiving one. They can get this subsidy back by downsizing. So if a family moves into their larger unit, the family will get more of a subsidy, making it more affordable for the family than for the empty nesters.

Lastly, let's take a look at your roommate. There is now a bigger supply of rental housing (created by more efficient allocation and construction incentives) and he needs a new roommate to keep his subsidy levels the same as they were before. This puts him and his potential new roommates on more equal footing during negotiations and will limit the chance that someone is overcharged on the grey market.

Rent relief gives people housing based on people using the housing they need, and empowers low income earners to demand more housing.

There are also a few other advantages to rent relief over our current rent control scheme. Currently, some landlords have been illegally raising rents beyond the rent control limits. This is banned but in order to get this fixed tenants need to go through the process of getting rent control enforced. People are busy, and don't have a ton of time to study the regulations and advocate on their own behalf. It creates an adversarial relationship between tenant and landlord, where the tenant may even fear retaliation from the landlord if they advocate for themselves. Arguing against the person responsible for fixing your heat can be a daunting proposition. Rent relief sidesteps this problem entirely. With the tax, the money is taken from the landlord upfront. It's taken by the city, a single, unified, entity with the expertise and resources to advocate for itself. The only way they can get this money back is if their tenants get the subsidies they are entitled to. So instead of an adversarial dynamic between tenant and landlord, landlords are now incentivized to help tenants navigate the system.

With our current rent control model, smaller landlords are completely exempt from rent control. This makes some sense, with fewer units they may not be able to make enough revenue on volume to be viable. However, this leaves a huge segment of the population unprotected. Portland doesn't have many huge apartment buildings, a lot of people do rent smaller places. Worse still this encourages the construction of rental buildings that have fewer units than they could. Rent relief would protect these people and remove this perverse incentive. Smaller landlords would be taxed, but if they are making good use of their land (which takes into account how high they are allowed to build on their plot and any landmark and zoning considerations) they can end up ahead.

Rent relief with a land value tax is flexible it can cover small buildings and large buildings, individuals and families, newcomers to our city and people who have lived here their whole lives. The rate can be dynamically adjusted in response to the housing market.

We can help people and make economically informed policy at the same time. We can help the people in need while growing our economy at the same time. This city has it's problems, but it also has a tremendous amount of energy to pursue change.

## Rent Relief vs Inclusionary Zoning

Inclusionary zoning is the policy of requiring that developers build a certain portion of affordable units or pay a fine. Before 2020 the inclusionary zoning number was 10% and the fee was $100,000 per unit. After a 2020 referendum it is now 25% and $150,000 per unit. This only effects buildings with 10 units or more. So if you were building a 10 unit building in 2019 you would need to pay $100,000 to avoid building an affordable unit, in 2020 you would need to pay $450,000 a 4.5x increase. While it would be nice to get more affordable housing, in practice this change has resulted in a near complete halt of developments over 10 units.

When making policy, we have to acknowledge an unfortunate fact. Developers tend not to build affordable units and will typically opt to pay the fees. I have heard explanations from developers and activists as to why this is but I don't think it is particularly productive getting bogged down in why this happens, we must acknowledge that it does happen and plan accordingly. Because of this fact, inclusionary zoning is really a tax on housing developments. A tax that we increased by 4.5x overnight. It is no wonder that development dropped precipitously once this was enacted.

This policy is essentially a wealth transfer from the lower and middle class to current land owners. Without new units coming on the market the existing units become increasingly valuable causing housing prices to increase across the board. Owners of current properties will see their values increase. Normally, this cost would be paid by renters with landlords increasing rents but with rent control in effect landlords will opt to sell their buildings to homeowners over time. This will result in renters being forced out, first time home buyers buying previously rental units at inflated prices, and housing prices going up and up.

Worse still, certain properties are exempt from these rules. Buildings with fewer than 10 units are exempt from inclusionary zoning. This encourages the construction of boutique high-priced small developments. With fewer units, they must be priced more to turn a profit. With more developments with less units the supply of housing for the same amount of land will be restricted across the city. The people who benefit the most from a lack of development are land owners so they need to pay their fair share. The land value tax spreads the cost of providing affordable housing across all property owners instead of placing it solely on developers who can and have just chosen to build somewhere else.

The land value tax serves as both a carrot and a stick. It incentivizes people to develop their land because developments may make their land more profitable and won't be taxed as they would with a property tax. It also incentivizes development of affordable housing by adding money for people to spend on it.

## Rent Relief and the Economy

Aren't taxes bad for the economy? Sometimes, but some taxes can actually improve the economy. Taxes hurt the economy when they discourage some kind of economic activity that would otherwise happen. For example, a sales tax. Let's say you sell chocolate bars and it costs you 95 cents to make each chocolate bar and people are willing to pay $1 for them. If a 5% sales tax was passed, selling a chocolate bar for $1 would cost you $1 so it wouldn't make sense to sell it. This is an oversimplification of course, in practice people sell and buy a bit less stuff. The land value tax makes it harder to hold onto land and do nothing with it. Making this harder is actually a good thing because everyone is better off when land is put to good use.

Better yet, this money will be given to low-income earners. Giving money to low-income earners stimulates the economy because low-income earners spend a greater portion of their money than high income earners. Transferring money from land owners, many may not even live in the city, and tend to be wealthier means money that would sit in a bank account is circulated through the local economy. We don't need to choose between economic growth and helping people who need it, sometimes we can have both.